>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 24:
CHARLOTTE POLICE DECIDE TO
RELEASE VIDEO OF THE SHOOTING
DEATH OF KEITH SCOTT; A GUNMAN
SHOOTS AND KILLS FIVE PEOPLE IN
A SHOPPING MALL NEAR SEATTLE;
AND, IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
GERRYMANDERING-- WHO SHOULD HAVE
THE POWER TO DRAW CONGRESSIONAL
DISTRICT LINES?
>> Reporter: WAS THIS DISTRICT
DRAWN THAT WAY JUST BECAUSE A
COUPLE OF GUYS GOT DRUNK, OR IS
THERE A POLITICAL MOTIVATION TO
THIS?
>> IT'S PRETTY CLEAR THAT IT WAS
POLITICALLY MOTIVATED.
>> Screenivasan: NEXT, ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
POLICE IN CHARLOTTE, NORTH
CAROLINA, SAID THIS AFTERNOON
THAT THEY WOULD RELEASE THEIR
OWN BODY- AND DASH-CAM VIDEOS OF
TUESDAY'S FATAL POLICE SHOOTING
OF A BLACK MAN, KEITH SCOTT.
THIS, AS HUNDREDS OF PEOPLE TOOK
PART IN A FIFTH DAY OF PROTESTS
OVER THE SHOOTINGS.
POLICE CHIEF KERR PUTNEY SAID IT
HAD BEEN DECIDED THAT RELEASING
THE VIDEOS WOULD NOT ADVERSELY
IMPACT THE INVESTIGATION.
PUTNEY SAID THAT SCOTT WAS
"ABSOLUTELY IN POSSESSION OF A
HANDGUN," IN POSSESSION OF
MARIJUANA AND HAD COMMITTED A
CRIME.
POLICE SHOT AND KILLED SCOTT
TUESDAY AFTERNOON IN THE PARKING
LOT OF HIS APARTMENT COMPLEX,
WHERE HE HAD PARKED IN HIS
PICKUP TRUCK TO WAIT FOR HIS
CHILDREN AFTER SCHOOL.
HIS WIFE RELEASED THIS VIDEO
YESTERDAY, WHICH SHE RECORDED ON
HER PHONE AS SHE WITNESSED THE
FATAL ENCOUNTER.
SHE IS HEARD TELLING POLICE HER
HUSBAND HAD A BRAIN INJURY AND
HAD JUST TAKEN MEDICATION.
>> DON'T SHOOT HIM.
HE HAS NO WEAPON.
>> Sreenivasan: EARLIER TODAY, I
SPOKE WITH "WASHINGTON POST"
REPORTER WESLEY LOWERY ABOUT THE
IMPLICATIONS OF POLICE SHOOTING
VIDEOS.
THERE IS A MUCH LARGER AMOUNT
AND VOLUME OF CAMERA FOOTAGE
FROM POLICE DEPARTMENTS AROUND
THE COUNTRY, BUT THERE DOESN'T
SEEM TO BE A CONSISTENT POLICY.
AND WHEN YOU LOOK AT MAYBE EVEN
THE TOP 20 POLICE DEPARTMENTS,
THERE'S DIFFERENCES IN WHETHER
OR NOT THEY'RE USING IT AND HOW
THEY'RE USING IT.
>> Reporter: YOU KNOW, ONE
THING ABOUT BODY CAMERAS AND
DASH CAMERAS, THIS VIDEO IS IN
MANY WAYS A NEW FRONTIER FOR
POLICING.
AND PEOPLE-- CIVIL RIGHTS
ACTIVISTS SAY THIS ALL THE TIME.
THE POLICE SHOOTINGS AREN'T NEW.
WHAT'S NEW IS THE VIDEO.
YOU KNOW, THE UNARMED MAN OR THE
PERSON WHO HAD A WEAPON PLANTED,
AND SO OFTEN WE DIDN'T BELIEVE
THOSE PEOPLE.
WE BELIEVED THE POLICE OFFICERS,
AND NOW WE HAVE VIDEO THAT IN
SOME CASES SHOWS US THE
OFFICERS' STORIES ARE NOT TRUE.
HOWEVER, THE SPREAD OF CAMERAS--
YOU KNOW, THERE WAS A HUGE
SPREAD OF CAMERAS, ESPECIALLY
POST-FERGUSON-- THERE STILL
REMAINS NOT A TON OF BEST
PRACTICES OR SET OF STANDARDS
FOR HOW THOSE CAMERAS ARE
DEPLOYED.
YOU WILL SEE A LOT OF INSTANCES
IN WHICH OFFICERS AREN'T TURNING
THEM ON OR NOT TURNING THEM ON
UNTIL AFTER.
ON TOP OF THAT, THERE ARE NO
BEST PRACTICES GOVERNING THE
RELEASE OF THIS VIDEO.
YOU HAVE A PUBLIC RECORD BEING
CREATED BY TAXPAYER DOLLARS,
THESE VIDEOS, BUT WHEN ARE THEY
RELEASED AND WHEN ARE THEY NOT
RELEASED?
OUR REVIEW FOUND WHILE MANY MORE
SHOOTINGS WERE BEING CAUGHT ON
CAMERA, THIS YEAR THAN LAST
YEAR, NOT MORE OF THEM ARE BEING
RELEASED.
IN FACT, IT'S MORE LIKELY THAN
NOT THAT WHEN A FATAL SHOOTING
IS CAPTURED ON CAMERA, IT WILL
NOT BE RELEASED TO THE PUBLIC.
RATHER, IT WILL BE SOMETHING THE
POLICE DEPARTMENT HOLDS ON TO.
>> Sreenivasan: SOME POLICE
DEPARTMENTS SAY, HEY, WE DON'T
TRY CASES IN THE COURT OF PUBLIC
OPINION.
WE DON'T STACK ALL THE PIECES OF
EVIDENCE OUT THERE AS WE GET IT.
AND SOMETIMES, THIS RELEASE OF
THE VIDEOS COULD ACTUALLY
JEOPARDIZE THE INVESTIGATION.
>> YOU KNOW, I THINK WE VERY
OFTEN HEAR THAT.
I THINK IT WOULD BE REALLY
INTERESTING TO INTERROGATE THAT
FURTHER, RIGHT?
I MEAN, THE MAN'S NAME IS A
PIECE OF EVIDENCE.
THE IDEA THAT HE WAS ARMED IS A
EVEN SAYING THAT IS A PIECE OF
EVIDENCE THAT THEORETICALLY
COULD HELP COLOR THE PERCEPTION
OF WITNESSES, RIGHT, BECAUSE NOW
THEY'VE HEARD FROM THE POLICE HE
WAS ARMED.
SO NOW MAYBE THEY REMEMBER A
WEAPON IN HIS HAND.
AND THE OTHER THING THAT'S
INTERESTING HERE-- AND THIS
COMES FROM OUR REPORTING AS
WELL-- IN MANY OF THESE CASES,
THE OFFICERS THEMSELVES ARE
ALLOWED TO WATCH THE VIDEO
BEFORE WRITING THEIR STATEMENTS,
SO YOU ARE POTENTIALLY CHANGING
THEIR STATEMENT BECAUSE THEY ARE
GIVEN THE BENEFIT OF SEEING THE
VIDEO.
COULD THAT NOT HAVE AN IMPACT ON
THE INVESTIGATION?
IN A POST-FERGUSON WORLD, I HAVE
HEARD PEOPLE ARGUE WHEN YOU PUT
OUT FACTUAL INFORMATION, IT
PREVENTS SOME PEOPLE WHO DID NOT
REALLY SEE THINGS COMING OUT AND
CLAIMING THEMSELVES TO BE
WITNESSES, OR HELPS YOU WEED OUT
PEOPLE WHO CLEARLY DID NOT SEE
WHAT HAPPENED.
THAT'S ONE OF THE ARGUMENTS I'VE
HEARD FROM SEVERAL SIDES HERE.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
WES LOWERY OF THE "WASHINGTON
POST," JOINING US FROM CHARLOTTE
TONIGHT, THANK YOU.
>> ANY TIME, THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: A MASSIVE SEARCH
FOR A LONE GUNMAN IN WASHINGTON
STATE CONTINUED TODAY AFTER FIVE
PEOPLE WERE KILLED IN A MASS
SHOOTING LAST NIGHT AT A MALL IN
BURLINGTON, 60 MILES NORTH OF
SEATTLE.
THE GUNMAN, DESCRIBED AS A
YOUNG, DARK-HAIRED MALE CARRYING
A HUNTING RIFLE, OPENED FIRE
LAST NIGHT JUST AFTER 7:00,
KILLING FOUR WOMEN AND WOUNDING
ONE MAN, WHO DIED EARLY THIS
MORNING.
THE SUSPECT WAS LAST SEEN ON
FOOT WALKING TOWARD A NEARBY
INTERSTATE HIGHWAY.
AUTHORITIES SAY THE WEAPON WAS
RECOVERED.
MORE THAN 200 POLICE OFFICERS
AND F.B.I. AGENTS HAVE LAUNCHED
A MANHUNT FOR THE SUSPECT.
AUTHORITIES HAVE SAID THAT AS OF
NOW, THERE IS NO EVIDENCE
LINKING THE SHOOTING TO ANY
PREVIOUS ATTACKS NOR TO ANY
PLANNED ATTACKS.
THEY SAID THERE'S NO INDICATION
THIS WAS A TERRORIST ACT.
THE CEASE-FIRE IN SYRIA THAT
BEGAN WITH SO MUCH HOPE AND
FANFARE ALMOST TWO WEEKS AGO IS
NO LONGER, DESPITE DIPLOMATIC
EFFORTS AT THE UNITED NATIONS.
RUSSIAN AND SYRIAN GOVERNMENT
WARPLANES CARRIED OUT MORE
RELENTLESS ATTACKS TODAY ON THE
REBEL-HELD EASTERN PART OF
DIVIDED ALEPPO.
ON THE GROUND, SYRIAN TROOPS AND
THEIR MILITIA ALLIES GAINED A
KEY STRATEGIC GOAL, A REBEL-HELD
PALESTINIAN REFUGEE CAMP ON HIGH
GROUND OVERLOOKING REBEL
POSITIONS IN THE CITY IN
NORTHERN SYRIA.
SCORES OF PEOPLE ARE REPORTED
KILLED SINCE THE NEW SYRIAN AND
RUSSIAN OFFENSIVE BEGAN TWO DAYS
AGO.
AND THERE'S ANOTHER CRISIS:
RUNNING WATER HAS BEEN CUT OFF
FOR TWO MILLION PEOPLE
THROUGHOUT ALEPPO AS THE
FIGHTING INTENSIFIES.
FOUR YEARS SINCE THE
GROUNDBREAKING, THE SMITHSONIAN
INSTITUTION'S NATIONAL MUSEUM OF
AFRICAN AMERICAN HISTORY AND
CULTURE OPENED TODAY IN
WASHINGTON, D.C.
IN 2003, GEORGE W. BUSH SIGNED
LEGISLATION APPROVING ITS
CREATION.
FORMER PRESIDENT BUSH SPOKE AT
THE OPENING CEREMONY, ALONG WITH
GEORGIA CONGRESSMAN AND CIVIL
RIGHTS LEADER JOHN LEWIS AND
SUPREME COURT CHIEF JUSTICE JOHN
ROBERTS.
PROMINENT AFRICAN AMERICANS
STEVIE WONDER, OPRAH WINFREY AND
WILL SMITH ALSO SPOKE.
THE CEREMONY INCLUDED A SPEECH
BY PRESIDENT OBAMA, WHO WAS
JOINED ON STAGE BY THE YOUNGEST
AND OLDEST MEMBERS OF THE BONNER
FAMILY.
THERE WAS SEVEN-YEAR-OLD
CHRISTINE AND 99-YEAR OLD RUTH,
WHOSE FATHER WAS AN ESCAPED
SLAVE WHO LATER BECAME A DOCTOR.
>> IT IS A MONUMENT, NO LESS
THAN THE OTHERS ON THIS MALL, TO
THE DEEP AND ABIDING LOVE FOR
THIS COUNTRY AND THE IDEALS UPON
WHICH IT IS FOUNDED.
FOR WE, TOO, ARE AMERICAN.
( BELL RINGS )
>> Sreenivasan: TOGETHER WITH
THE PRESIDENT, THEY SIGNALED THE
OPENING OF THE MUSEUM BY RINGING
A BELL BELONGING TO THE FIRST
BLACK BAPTIST CHURCH IN
VIRGINIA.
>> Sreenivasan: NOVEMBER'S
ELECTION ISN'T JUST ABOUT
WINNING THE WHITE HOUSE; IT MAY
ALSO HELP DECIDE WHO CONTROLS
THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
AFTER THE NEXT U.S. CENSUS, JUST
FOUR YEARS AWAY.
THAT'S BECAUSE OF THE HARDBALL
POLITICAL PROCESS CALLED
REDISTRICTING, HOW STATE
LEGISLATURES REDRAW THE LINES ON
THE MAP THAT DIVIDE THEIR STATES
INTO HOUSE DISTRICTS.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT JEFF GREENFIELD
TAKES A CLOSER LOOK AT WHY
REDISTRICTING CAN BE SO
CONTENTIOUS.
>> Reporter: FOR DR. MARK
PLASTER, IT'S ANOTHER DAY ON THE
ROAD, RACKING UP MILE AFTER MILE
ON A BUS THAT'S SEEN BETTER
DAYS.
>> WE'VE WORN IT OUT.
I MEAN, WE'VE PUT A LOT OF MILES
ON IT.
ALL THIS UPHOLSTERY THAT'S ALL
BEAT UP RIGHT NOW, IT USED TO BE
PRISTINE.
>> Reporter: BUT PLASTER ISN'T
MAKING ROUNDS AS THE EMERGENCY
ROOM DOCTOR HE WAS; HE'S RUNNING
FOR CONGRESS AS THE REPUBLICAN
NOMINEE IN A MARYLAND DISTRICT
WHOSE SHAPE SEEMS INSPIRED, NOT
BY GEOGRAPHY, BUT BY PURE
PARTISAN POLITICS.
WAS THIS DISTRICT DRAWN THAT WAY
JUST BECAUSE A COUPLE OF GUYS
GOT DRUNK, OR IS THERE A
POLITICAL MOTIVATION TO THIS?
>> IT'S PRETTY CLEAR, IT'S
PRETTY CLEAR THAT IT WAS
POLITICALLY MOTIVATED.
THE IDEA WAS TO HAND A DISTRICT
TO THE DEMOCRATIC CANDIDATE.
THE STATE PRETTY MUCH IS ABOUT
EVEN, ROUGHLY, MAYBE A SLIGHT
ADVANTAGE FOR DEMOCRATS IN
REGISTRATION.
BUT BY DRAWING IT THE WAY THEY
HAVE, IT NOW IS 7-1 IN
REPRESENTATION IN THE HOUSE.
>> Reporter: WHAT PLASTER IS
TALKING ABOUT IS CALLED
"GERRYMANDERING," THE ART OF
DRAWING DISTRICTS TO PUT AS MANY
OF YOUR VOTERS TOGETHER, OR,
MORE OFTEN, TO MAKE SURE THE
OTHER PARTY'S VOTERS ARE BROKEN
UP AND SCATTERED.
IT GETS ITS NAME FROM A 19th
CENTURY POLITICIAN NAMED
ELBRIDGE GERRY.
AS GOVERNOR OF MASSACHUSETTS, HE
HELPED SHAPE A CONGRESSIONAL
DISTRICT SO BLATANTLY ONE-SIDED
THAT ONE CRITIC SAID IT "LOOKED
LIKE A SALAMANDER."
"NO," ANOTHER REPLIED, "A
GERRYMANDER."
TODAY, STATE LEGISLATURES ACROSS
THE COUNTRY, THE MAJORITY OF
THEM REPUBLICAN, DRAW
CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICT LINES,
SOMETHING REQUIRED WITH EVERY
NEW CENSUS EVERY TEN YEARS, TO
MAXIMIZE THEIR PARTY'S
ADVANTAGE.
THAT HAD PARTICULAR IMPACT AFTER
THE REPUBLICANS DOMINATED THE
2010 MIDTERM ELECTIONS, TAKING
CONTROL OF BOTH LEGISLATIVE
CHAMBERS IN 25 STATES AND
GOVERNORSHIPS IN 29 STATES.
>> 2010 WAS A REAL BENCHMARK
BECAUSE IT PRODUCED SO MANY
STATES IN WHICH THE REPUBLICANS
COMPLETELY CONTROLLED THE
PROCESS.
>> Reporter: DAVID ROHDE IS A
POLITICAL SCIENTIST AT DUKE
UNIVERSITY IN NORTH CAROLINA,
ONE OF THE STATES WHERE
REPUBLICANS WON CONTROL OF THE
STATE LEGISLATURE.
>> GERRYMANDERING HAS A LARGER
IMPACT ON BIGGER STATES.
THAT IS, THE MORE THE
POPULATION, THE MORE WAYS YOU
CAN DIVIDE IT UP, THE MORE SEATS
YOU HAVE TO DISTRIBUTE.
SO, THE REPUBLICANS WERE
FORTUNATE ENOUGH TO GAIN CONTROL
OF A NUMBER OF LARGE STATES IN
2010, WHERE THEY HAD NOT
CONTROLLED REDISTRICTING BEFORE.
>> Reporter: IN PENNSYLVANIA,
FOR EXAMPLE, 44% OF THE VOTERS
CHOSE DEMOCRATIC CANDIDATES FOR
THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES IN
2014, BUT 13 OF THE 18
DISTRICTS, MORE THAN TWO-THIRDS,
ARE REPRESENTED BY REPUBLICANS.
IN OHIO, ABOUT 40% OF THE VOTERS
CHOSE DEMOCRATIC CANDIDATES FOR
THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
BUT 12 OUT OF 16 SEATS, THREE-
QUARTERS OF THEM, ARE
REPRESENTED BY REPUBLICANS.
IN MARYLAND, WHICH WAS
CONTROLLED BY THE DEMOCRATS IN
2010, THE PARTISAN TILT IS
UNSURPRISINGLY REVERSED.
IF YOU WANT AN EXAMPLE OF
GERRYMANDERING AT ITS MOST
CREATIVE, COME HERE TO
MARYLAND'S THIRD CONGRESSIONAL
DISTRICT-- SO ATTENUATED, SO
DETACHED, THAT TO GET FROM ONE
END OF THE DISTRICT TO THE
OTHER, YOU WOULD NEED A TANK
FULL OF GAS-- OR A BOAT.
THE DISTRICT'S PERIMETER RUNS
ABOUT 225 MILES, WITH A SHAPE
DESCRIBED BY ONE FEDERAL JUDGE
AS "A BROKEN-WINGED PTERODACTYL
LYING PROSTRATE."
ITS BODY IS BROKEN UP BY FOUR
OTHER CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICTS,
MAKING CAMPAIGNING A LOGISTICAL
NIGHTMARE.
INDEED, SO DISCONNECTED IS THE
THIRD THAT PROTESTORS STAGED A
"GERRYMANDER MEANDER," SHOWING
JUST HOW SPRAWLING IT IS.
>> IT'S NOT SO MUCH GOING
THROUGH OTHER DISTRICTS AS MUCH
AS HOW DIFFERENT THE PEOPLE ARE
IN EACH ONE OF THOSE AREAS.
ANNAPOLIS IS A VERY MILITARY
TOWN, SOMEWHAT CONSERVATIVE.
IT GOES ALL THE WAY UP TO
PIKESVILLE, WHICH IS A JEWISH
COMMUNITY.
IT GOES AND INCORPORATES GIBSON
ISLAND, WHICH IS THE ULTRA-RICH
WATERFRONT.
IT INVOLVES THE INNER HARBOR,
WHAT I CALL THE HIPSTERS OF
FEDERAL HILL.
IT'S VERY, VERY DIFFERENT.
AND THOSE FOLKS HAVE A TENDENCY
TO NOT KNOW EACH OTHER, NOR DO
THEY HAVE A LOT OF ISSUES IN
COMMON, WHICH MAKES IT
DIFFICULT.
>> MARYLAND HAS BEEN SINGLED OUT
FOR HAVING SOME OF THE MOST
GERRYMANDERED DISTRICTS IN THE
ENTIRE COUNTRY.
THIS IS NOT A DISTINCTION THAT
WE SHOULD BE PROUD OF.
>> Reporter: LARRY HOGAN, A
MODERATE REPUBLICAN, WAS ELECTED
GOVERNOR IN 2014 AND HAD MADE
REDISTRICTING A MAJOR CAMPAIGN
ISSUE.
LAST YEAR, THE GOVERNOR CREATED
A COMMISSION THAT LOOKED AT THE
ISSUE.
IT RECOMMENDED MARYLAND JOIN
CALIFORNIA, ARIZONA, IDAHO AND
WASHINGTON STATE IN TAKING THE
POWER TO DRAW THESE LINES AWAY
FROM THE LEGISLATURE AND PUTTING
IT INTO THE HANDS OF AN
INDEPENDENT COMMISSION.
>> THEY'RE NEVER GOING TO REACH
THEM BY THAT DATE.
>> Reporter: DEMOCRAT JOAN
CARTER CONWAY, A MARYLAND STATE
SENATOR FOR 19 YEARS, SERVED ON
THE PANEL THAT STUDIED THE
ISSUE.
LEGISLATION THAT WOULD HAVE
GIVEN A COMMISSION POWER TO DRAW
LEGISLATIVE LINES IN THE FUTURE,
FAILED.
>> THE STATE OF MARYLAND
TODAY, WE ARE DEMOCRATIC, AND WE
HAVE A PROCESS IN TERMS OF HOW
WE REDISTRICT.
AND AT THIS JUNCTURE, WE DON'T
SEE ANY ERRORS OR FLAWS IN IT.
>> Reporter: SENATOR CONWAY SAYS
SHE WAS UNWILLING FOR HER STATE
TO CHANGE ITS PRO-DEMOCRATIC
TILT WHILE FAR MORE STATES DRAW
THEIR DISTRICT LINES TO BENEFIT
REPUBLICANS.
>> I DON'T THINK MARYLAND SHOULD
BE IN A POSITION TO CHANGE
UNLESS IT'S A NATIONAL CHANGE.
IT'S VERY PARTISAN.
THE DEMOCRATS HAVE BEEN ACCUSED
OF DRAWING LINES TO HELP THEM,
THE REPUBLICANS DRAW THE LINES
TO HELP THEM.
>> Reporter: SHE COULD WELL BE
THINKING OF NORTH CAROLINA,
WHICH HOLDS THE DISTINCTION OF
BEING ONE OF THE OTHER MOST
GERRYMANDERED STATES IN THE
UNION.
THOUGH REPUBLICANS WON A 56%
STATEWIDE MAJORITY OF VOTES FOR
CONGRESS IN 2014, THEY HOLD A
10-3 MAJORITY IN THE DELEGATION.
FOR REPUBLICAN STATE
REPRESENTATIVE DAVID LEWIS, WHO
CO-CHAIRED THE STATE'S COMMITTEE
ON CONGRESSIONAL REDISTRICTING,
IT'S SIMPLY IMPOSSIBLE TO TAKE
PARTISANSHIP OUT OF THE PROCESS.
>> I THINK IT'S MORE HONEST AND
UP-FRONT TO SAY, THAT AS A
REPUBLICAN I'M GOING TO FOLLOW
THE LAW, I'M GOING TO FOLLOW THE
RULES OF THE LAW, AND IF THERE
IS A DISCRETIONARY DECISION TO
BE MADE, I WILL MAKE IT FROM MY
PARTISAN POINT OF VIEW.
>> Reporter: THE SUPREME COURT
HAS LONG TOLD STATES THEY MUST
DRAW LINES THAT PROVIDE FOR
EQUAL POPULATIONS-- "ONE PERSON,
ONE VOTE"-- AND SINCE THE
PASSAGE OF THE 1965 VOTING
RIGHTS ACT, HAS LOOKED WITH
SUSPICION ON RACIALLY-MOTIVATED
LINES.
BUT AS A RULE, THE COURT HAS
PERMITTED REDISTRICTING WITH A
PARTISAN PURPOSE.
THAT'S A POINT THAT LEWIS MADE
IN A REMARKABLE DISPLAY OF
CANDOR ON THE STATE HOUSE FLOOR
BACK IN FEBRUARY.
THE LINES WERE DRAWN, IN PART,
HE SAID, TO GIVE REPUBLICANS THE
BIGGEST POSSIBLE BENEFIT.
>> A FURTHER CRITERIA WAS
PARTISAN ADVANTAGE.
WE BELIEVE THAT THIS MAP WILL
PRODUCE AN OPPORTUNITY TO ELECT
TEN REPUBLICAN MEMBERS OF
CONGRESS.
>> Reporter: AS FOR THOSE
INDEPENDENT COMMISSIONS, LEWIS
SEES THEM AS POLITICALLY
MOTIVATED BY DEMOCRATS.
>> I THINK IT'S GREAT POLITICS.
IF I FELT THERE WERE ANY WAY IN
THE WORLD THAT I COULD STAND
BEFORE MY CONSTITUENTS AND SAY,
"I BELIEVE THAT IT'S POSSIBLE TO
COME UP WITH A GROUP OF PEOPLE
WHO HAVE NO POLITICAL BIAS
WHATSOEVER, WHO WILL SIMPLY SIT
DOWN IN A ROOM AND MAGICALLY
CREATE DISTRICTS," I'D BE BEHIND
IT.
I'D BE BEHIND IT 100%.
BUT THOSE PEOPLE DON'T EXIST.
>> Reporter: IT'S A RARE POINT
OF AGREEMENT WITH DEMOCRAT JOAN
CARTER CONWAY IN MARYLAND.
>> THE CONCEPT IS A MARVELOUS
CONCEPT, AND I WILL NOT SIT HERE
AND SAY I DISAGREE WITH THE
INDEPENDENT COMMISSION.
THE PROBLEM THEN BECOMES, WHO
ARE YOU CONSIDERING INDEPENDENT?
>> Reporter: BUT THE SUPREME
COURT HAS WARNED AGAINST TOO
MUCH PARTISANSHIP.
IN A 2004 CONCURRING OPINION,
JUSTICE ANTHONY KENNEDY WROTE,
"PARTISAN GERRYMANDERS ARE
INCOMPATIBLE WITH DEMOCRATIC
PRINCIPLES."
>> THE SUPREME COURT HAS SAID
THAT THIS IS A POLITICAL
QUESTION AND THAT LEGISLATURES
ARE ALLOWED, EXPECTED TO TRY TO
EXTRACT ADVANTAGE.
BUT JUSTICES HAVE ALSO SAID...
SOME JUSTICES DISAGREED WITH
THAT, BUT OTHER JUSTICES SAY,
"YES, THAT'S TRUE, BUT YOU CAN
GO TOO FAR."
>> Reporter: THAT'S KENNEDY.
>> THAT WAS KENNEDY, AMONG
OTHERS.
SO, THE QUESTION IS, "WHAT'S TOO
FAR?"
AND IT'S SORT OF LIKE POTTER
STEWART'S OLD OBSCENITY
DEFINITION: "I'LL KNOW IT WHEN I
SEE IT."
>> Reporter: FOR MARC ELIAS, A
PROMINENT DEMOCRATIC ELECTION
LAW ATTORNEY ADVISING THE
HILLARY CLINTON CAMPAIGN, NORTH
CAROLINA HAS CLEARLY GONE TOO
FAR.
>> YOU DON'T NECESSARILY NEED TO
WORRY ABOUT WHERE YOU DRAW THE
LINE, TO KNOW IT WHEN YOU SEE
IT, BECAUSE IF EVER THERE WERE A
PLACE WHERE WE KNEW IT WAS 100%,
IT WAS IN NORTH CAROLINA.
>> Reporter: ELIAS SUED THE
STATE IN 2013, ARGUING THE
CONGRESSIONAL LINES
UNCONSTITUTIONALLY DILUTED
AFRICAN-AMERICAN VOTING
STRENGTH.
AND THEN, EARLIER THIS YEAR, HE
ARGUED THAT THE REPLACEMENT MAP
WAS ALSO UNCONSTITUTIONAL.
WHY?
BECAUSE, HE SAID, IT WAS "A
BALD PARTISAN GERRYMANDER."
>> THE STATES NEED TO HAVE
MEANINGFUL ELECTIONS.
AND IF YOU CREATE A SYSTEM IN
WHICH THE VOTES FOR CONGRESS ARE
SIMPLY MEANINGLESS BECAUSE THE
INCUMBENT MEMBERS HAVE
ESSENTIALLY DRAWN DISTRICTS THAT
THEY CAN NEVER BE DEFEATED,
QUERY WHETHER OR NOT YOU EVEN
HAVE A TRUE REPUBLICAN FORM OF
GOVERNMENT.
>> Reporter: ONE OF THE
ASSERTIONS OF REPRESENTATIVE
LEWIS IS, "THERE'S NO SUCH THING
AS A NONPARTISAN PERSON."
HE SAYS YOU CAN'T TAKE POLITICS
OUT OF POLITICS.
>> THE FACT THAT YOU MAY NEVER
BE ABLE TO FIND SOMEONE WHO IS
ENTIRELY NONPARTISAN ISN'T
REALLY AN... ISN'T REALLY AN
EXCUSE FOR LEAVING IT IN THE
HANDS OF A LEGISLATURE IN NORTH
CAROLINA THAT SAID WE'RE GOING
TO DRAW THE MAP 100% BASED ON
PARTISANSHIP.
>> Reporter: IN ADDITION TO THE
CHALLENGES IN NORTH CAROLINA,
CASES IN MARYLAND AND WISCONSIN
CHALLENGING PARTISAN
REDISTRICTING ARE ALL MAKING
THEIR WAY THROUGH THE COURTS.
THAT'S TOO LATE TO HELP DR. MARK
PLASTER IN HIS UNDERDOG
CAMPAIGN.
AFTER HOPSCOTCHING MARYLAND
HIGHWAYS FOR 45 MINUTES, IN AND
OUT OF THE THIRD CONGRESSIONAL
DISTRICT, WE RETURNED TO THE
AREA HE HOPES TO REPRESENT.
>> WE'VE MADE THIS PROBLEM.
IT JUST DOESN'T NEED TO BE.
THERE ARE ENOUGH PEOPLE TO FORM
A CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICT WITHIN
20 MINUTES OF WHERE WE STARTED.
BUT INSTEAD, WE HAVE TO TRAVEL
AN HOUR AND A HALF THIS WAY, AN
HOUR AND A HALF THAT WAY, AN
HOUR AND A HALF THAT WAY.
AND IT'S BY DESIGN.
>> Sreenivasan: TAKE A DRIVE
THROUGH ONE OF THE MOST
GERRYMANDERED CONGRESSIONAL
DISTRICTS IN THE COUNTRY.
THE FOUR-HOUR JOURNEY ONLY TAKES
ONE MINUTE AT
www.facebook.com/newshour.
ALONG THE NORTHWEST COAST OF
WASHINGTON STATE, IN THE PACIFIC
OCEAN INLET KNOWN AS PUGET
SOUND, HUNDREDS OF WHITE
AMERICAN PELICANS ARRIVED
UNEXPECTEDLY THIS YEAR.
THEIR APPEARANCE EXCITED AND
SURPRISED BIRD WATCHERS BECAUSE
PUGET SOUND AND THE SURROUNDING
REGION IS GENERALLY OUTSIDE THE
PELICANS' RANGE.
BUT AS REPORTER KATIE CAMPBELL
FROM PBS STATION KCTS AND THE
PUBLIC MEDIA PARTNERSHIP
EARTHFIX TELLS US, THE PELICANS
SEEM TO BE ADAPTING TO CLIMATE
CHANGE.
>> Reporter: MATT KERSCHBAUM AND
SUE EHLER HAVE A RITUAL--
EVERY OTHER WEEK FROM APRIL
THROUGH SEPTEMBER...
>> WE COME DOWN AND WE SET UP
OUR SPOTTING SCOPE.
>> WE GET OUT OUR DATA SHEETS
AND A HAND CLICKER.
>> I CALL IT A TALLEYWHACKER.
>> Reporter: AND THE CITIZEN
SCIENTISTS COUNT THE HERONS OF
PADILLA BAY.
>> YOU'RE SEEING SOMETIMES IN
THE NEIGHBORHOOD OF 500, 600
BIRDS.
IT'S EXTRAORDINARILY DIFFICULT
TO COUNT IN YOUR MINDS.
>> WHAT WAS YOUR TOTAL COUNT ON
THAT ONE?
>> 210.
>> 210, OKAY.
>> Reporter: THIS ESTUARY IN
NORTHWEST WASHINGTON IS HOME TO
THOUSANDS OF BIRDS, INCLUDING
THE LARGEST BREEDING COLONIES OF
GREAT BLUE HERONS IN THE PACIFIC
NORTHWEST.
COUNTS LIKE THESE SERVE AS AN
ANNUAL CHECKUP.
>> WE WATCH ALL THE SPECIES THAT
ARE HERE AND ARE KIND OF USED TO
WHO'S WHO.
>> Reporter: THE AMERICAN WHITE
PELICAN'S RANGE STRETCHES ACROSS
MUCH OF THE COUNTRY, BUT IT
USUALLY DOESN'T TOUCH WESTERN
WASHINGTON.
>> IT'S UNPRECEDENTED FOR THEM
TO BE HERE, SO SOMETHING REALLY
UNUSUAL IS HAPPENING.
>> OKAY, I FOUND THE PELICANS.
THEY'RE RIGHT BY THE BOAT.
>> AH-HA!
WOW, OKAY!
>> Reporter: WHITE PELICANS ARE
CONSPICUOUS BIRDS, WITH THEIR
NINE-FOOT WINGSPANS AND LONG
ORANGE BILLS.
THEY'RE DIFFERENT FROM BROWN
PELICANS, THE ONES THAT DIVE FOR
FISH, AND A MORE COMMON VISITOR
TO COASTAL WASHINGTON.
AT FIRST, KERSHBAUM AND EHLER
COUNTED JUST A HANDFUL OF
PELICANS.
>> THEN, WE HAD, LIKE, 30.
AND THEN, THERE WERE 50.
AND FINALLY, IT WAS UP TO 100.
>> Reporter: FROM THE SPRING TO
THE FALL, THE REGION'S WHITE
PELICANS NORMALLY STICK CLOSE TO
A FEW MAJOR BREEDING AREAS
FARTHER SOUTH AND EAST.
WITH PARTS OF OREGON AND
CALIFORNIA ENDURING ANOTHER YEAR
OF SEVERE DROUGHT, SOME OF THEIR
BEST PROTECTED BREEDING GROUNDS
HAVE GONE DRY.
OREGON'S MALHEUR NATIONAL
WILDLIFE REFUGE HAS REPORTED
FAILED BREEDING COLONIES FOR TWO
YEARS.
SO, THESE PELICANS IN PUGET
SOUND COULD BE PIONEERS
SEARCHING FOR A SUITABLE SITE
FOR A NEW COLONY.
ONE PLACE THEY SEEM FOND OF IS
THIS SMALL LAGOON.
>> WELL, THIS IS THE FIRST FOR
THEM TO BE HERE.
>> Reporter: JOE SHELDON HAS
NEVER SEEN PELICANS IN ALMOST 20
YEARS OF LIVING HERE.
>> SEEING WHITE PELICANS IN
WESTERN WASHINGTON IS UNUSUAL.
SEEING A 180 WHITE PELICANS IN
WESTERN WASHINGTON IS UNHEARD
OF.
>> Reporter: SHELDON IS A
RETIRED PROFESSOR OF ECOLOGY.
HE SAYS THE PRESSURES OF CLIMATE
CHANGE COULD BE AT PLAY.
>> YOU MIGHT DESCRIBE THESE AS A
CLIMATE REFUGEE, IF INDEED
MALHEUR HAS DRIED TO THE POINT
WHERE THEY CAN NO LONGER FEED
AND BREED THERE.
>> Reporter: PELICAN COLONIES
ACROSS THE COUNTRY HAVE INDEED
BEEN SHIFTING NORTH BY ABOUT 200
MILES OVER THE LAST 50 YEARS.
BUT IT'S TOO SOON TO SAY IF
THESE PELICANS ARE JUST PUGET
SOUND TOURISTS, OR NEW SEASONAL
RESIDENTS.
>> SO, WILL THEY COME BACK?
WE'LL WAIT AND SEE FOR NEXT
YEAR.
>> THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: PHIL FREELON IS
THE LEAD ARCHITECT OF THE NEW
SMITHSONIAN NATIONAL MUSEUM OF
AFRICAN-AMERICAN HISTORY AND
CULTURE IN WASHINGTON, D.C.
HE SPOKE WITH THE NEWSHOUR
BEFORE THE OPENING AND TALKED
ABOUT WHAT THE UNIQUE STRUCTURE
REPRESENTS.
>> THIS SITE IS A VERY IMPORTANT
SITE HERE IN THE NATION'S
CAPITAL, LITERALLY WITHIN THE
SHADOW OF THE WASHINGTON
MONUMENT.
MANY OF THE BUILDINGS ON THE
MALL ARE MARBLE, GRANITE,
CONCRETE, LIGHTER IN COLOR.
THIS BUILDING HAS A VARIATION IN
HOW IT APPEARS.
SO, ON CERTAIN DAYS, ON CERTAIN
LIGHTING CONDITIONS, IT CAN BE
VERY VIBRANT AND BRIGHT.
AND OTHER TIMES OF THE DAY OR
IN THE EVENING, IT IS DARKER.
SO, WE WANT TO BRING NATURAL
LIGHT INTO THE PUBLIC'S AREAS,
BUT, AT THE SAME TIME, WE WANT
TO SHADE THAT HEAT GAIN AND
GLARE.
SO, THE CORONA SERVES THE
FUNCTION OF VARIEGATING THE
LIGHT, OF CREATING SHADE ON THE
BUILDING.
THIS BUILDING IS THE FIRST LEED
GOLD-CERTIFIED MUSEUM ON THE
MALL, AND THAT'S IMPORTANT
BECAUSE WE WANT THIS BUILDING
NOT ONLY TO BE HERE FOR A
HUNDRED YEARS PLUS, BUT NOT BE A
BURDEN ON THE ENVIRONMENT.
THIS MUSEUM IS FOR EVERYONE.
I WANT TO BE CLEAR ABOUT THAT.
OUR STORY, THE STORY OF AFRICAN-
AMERICANS IN THIS COUNTRY, IS
ONE THAT THE DIRECTOR, LONNIE
BUNCH, OFTEN SAYS IS THE
QUINTESSENTIAL AMERICAN STORY,
RIGHT?
THERE'S SOME STRUGGLE, BUT
THERE'S ALSO TRIUMPH.
AND SO, WE TELL THE TRUTH.
AND THERE ARE SOME DIFFICULT
MOMENTS THAT WE ALL KNOW ABOUT,
AND THEY CONTINUE EVEN FORWARD
INTO 2016 AND BEYOND.
SO, IT IS IMPORTANT TO HAVE
THOSE STORIES THERE, BUT THERE'S
ALSO THE EVERYDAY SUCCESSES OF
PEOPLE IN THIS COUNTRY, AFRICAN-
AMERICANS, AND THE CONTRIBUTION
WE MADE NOT ONLY TO THIS CULTURE
BUT WORLDWIDE.
>> Sreenivasan: AND A REMINDER
THAT YOU CAN STAY UP TO DATE
WITH DEVELOPMENTS FROM CHARLOTTE
ONLINE AT pbs.org/newshour.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
"PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.